Title: Any-Body Guard: Universal Safeguarding for Manipulation Policies via Action Masking

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.22278v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 02:16:45 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# Any-Body Guard: Universal Safeguarding for Manipulation Policies via Action Masking 

Alex Beaudin ∗ Hanna Krasowski ∗ Kartik Nagpal ∗

Sanjit A. Seshia Murat Arcak Negar Mehr 

University of California, Berkeley 

{alex beaudin, krasowski, kartiknagpal, sseshia, arcak, negar }@berkeley.edu 

Abstract: Ensuring safety of learning-enabled robotic manipulation across di-verse embodiments and tasks still requires significant manual engineering. Ex-isting approaches typically rely on heuristically designed fallback controllers or complex forward invariance assessments. These methods are often too conserva-tive for task success, too computationally expensive for real-time execution, too heuristic to provide useful safety guarantees, or too engineering-heavy to transfer between setups. In this paper, we propose a universal safeguarding approach, X-Safe , which reasons directly in the robot’s configuration space to provide formal probabilistic guarantees for collision avoidance. By operating in the configura-tion space, our method transfers across embodiments while relying solely on an object-based, quasi-static scene representation and a forward kinematics model of the robotic manipulator. Thus, X-Safe provides useful formal safety guarantees without requiring additional data, or engineering effort for different embodiments or scenes. We demonstrate X-Safe for diverse embodiments and policies, both in simulation and on hardware. We observe less degradation in task performance compared to state-of-the-art safeguarding, no collisions on hardware experiments, and empirically corroborate our formal guarantees. 

Keywords: Safety, cross-embodiment, robotic manipulation, probabilistic guar-antees 

# 1 Introduction 

Safety is a necessary condition for deploying robots in unstructured, open-world environments. For learning-based robotic systems, there has been significant progress to enhance their safety through intrinsic safety alignment [1, 2] and test-time safeguarding [3, 4]. In the context of robotic ma-nipulation, existing test-time safeguarding approaches typically need to be engineered for specific embodiments and tasks, e.g., by deriving simplified dynamics or collision models [5, 6], or re-quire gathering unsafe trajectories in simulation to learn representations of safety [7, 8]. Addition-ally, these ex-post interventions reduce performance of policies because adding the safeguard often pushes the robot into out-of-distribution states at execution time [4, 9, 10] or relies on fallback con-trollers that counteract performance [6, 11]. Practically, for high-dimensional action spaces and close-proximity tasks such as bimanual manipulation, existing safeguards typically do not scale to real time or require tedious engineering. In this work, we propose a scalable and embodiment-transferable safeguard that provides proba-bilistic guarantees for robotic manipulation with learned state- or vision-based policies. Our safe-guard ensures collision avoidance with respect to the robot’s embodiment and quasi-static obstacles 

> ∗

Equal contribution. 

> arXiv:2606.22278v1 [cs.RO] 21 Jun 2026

Policy 

image-based 

or 

state-based 

or 

teleoperated 

Safeguarding with X-Safe 

t = 1 t = 2 ... t = n     

> action at
> original pose qt
> action set A(st)
> safe action asafe
> t
> masking ray
> safe polytope Pst

Environment 

xArm7 Aloha 

Panda 

or ...        

> a1: nasafe 1: n
> policy state sπt←sπt+n
> safety-relevant state st←st+n

Figure 1: Overview of our safeguarding method, X-Safe, that can take action sequences from policies together with a scene, i.e., safety-relevant state. The middle box illustrates safeguarding for n actions in two exemplary directions of the configuration space. At t = 1 , the action set A is fully enclosed in the safe polytope Ps and consequently the action remains the same. In contrast, at t = 2 , the safe polytope intersects with the action set in the direction of the masking ray, and the proposed action a2 is corrected to asafe 2 . The safeguarding sequentially corrects all n actions. 

given an object-based scene representation, which describes the robot and obstacles spatially in the workspace. We achieve this by computing probabilistically safe polytopes in the robot configura-tion space, which are combined with action masking such that candidate actions are adjusted to safe actions. Our safeguard is computationally efficient, which we demonstrate in simulation and on hardware for robotic manipulation tasks. Our main contributions are: • We propose X-Safe , a framework in configuration space that safeguards manipulation poli-cies and is transferable to different embodiments without additional engineering or learning effort while ensuring probabilistic collision avoidance for quasi-static environments. • We achieve efficient computation by combining fast-computed safe polytopes with an ef-ficient action masking formulation allowing for both image- and state-based policies, and high-degree-of-freedom manipulation tasks. • We compare our approach on single-arm and two-arm robotic manipulators for pick-and-place tasks in cluttered quasi-static environments, empirically showing that collisions are below the expected probability or zero for hardware evaluations, and the performance drop is halved compared to a state-of-the-art safeguard baseline. 

# 2 Related Work 

Learning with safeguards. Safeguarding methods for learning-based robotic systems have been significantly improved and expanded in the last decade [3]. While most literature focuses on soft safety constraints, methods that can ensure probabilistic or hard guarantees on safety are necessary when a violation damages the robot or environment [4]. For continuous action spaces, methods that project unsafe action to the boundary of a safe set dominate, e.g., using control barrier functions (CBFs) [12, 13, 14, 15], buffer sets [16, 17, 18], or reachability analysis [19, 20, 11, 21]. However, boundary projection frequently results in learning and deployment instabilities [4, 9, 10, 22]. Alter-natively, continuous action masking has been proposed, where the policy is extended with a function that ensures selecting safe actions only [23]. Here, we introduce an action masking safeguard that corrects actions consistent with the policy’s proposed direction in configuration space. 2Safeguarding for learned manipulation policies. For robotic manipulation, an elementary notion of safety is collision avoidance with itself and the environment, e.g., static obstacles like tables or dynamic obstacles like humans [24]. Developing safeguards to enforce collision avoidance across quasi-static or dynamic environments is challenging. Such safeguards must run in real time to effectively ensure safety, yet remain minimally invasive to avoid performance degradation. Thus, a common approach is to combine a monitor that detects unsafe actions with a fallback policy that replaces unsafe actions with stopping actions [25, 26, 6]. Another safeguarding solution is to learn CBFs from simulations or handcraft candidate CBFs and use them in a quadratic program to filter unsafe actions [27, 28, 7]. However, candidate CBFs do not provide formal guarantees as they lack a proof of forward invariance [29]. Lastly, simplified robot models together with reachability analysis can be used to correct unsafe actions [5] but introduce conservatism that makes close-proximity operations challenging, e.g., grasping in cluttered environments or bimanual manipulation. Instead, we propose a systematic, safe action set synthesis that is easily transferable across embodiments and environments as it relies only on an object-based scene representation and knowledge of the robotic arm’s forward kinematics. 

Safe trajectory optimization for manipulation. Even for traditional optimization or motion planning approaches, which assume much more information about the scene than learning-based approaches, ensuring action safety remains a complex challenge [30]. The existence of many non-convex obstacles in real-world robotic scenes often causes sampling-based planners to struggle find-ing feasible paths [31, 32] and optimization methods to converge to local minima and perform poorly [33, 34]. These methods are also infeasible in cases where contact is necessary for task completion, such as in pick and place [35]. Recently, mixed methods aim to decompose the free configuration space into large convex safe subsets to enable efficient, convex trajectory optimization [36, 37]. Recent research translated this concept to manipulation and proposed a real-time variant by leveraging GPU parallelization Werner et al. [38, 39]. In this work, we draw from this line of work and develop a safeguard amendable for black-box policies leveraging safe set computations in the robot configuration space. 

# 3 Problem Formulation 

We denote sets and set operations with calligraphic letters. We let the function vol denote the Lebesgue measure for a set and ⟨A, b ⟩P abbreviate a polytope P in halfspace representation 

P = {x | Ax ≤ b}. We define a “safety-relevant state” s = ( q, s env ) ∈ S comprised of the current configuration q ∈ RDoF and the object-based scene representation senv , which describes the locations and dimensions of objects in the environment apart from the robotic manipulator. The actions a ∈ A are in configuration space, where the action set is A ∈ RDoF , with DoF being the degrees of freedom of the manipulator. Further, the state-dependent action set A(s) is defined relative to the current configuration of the robotic manipulator q, i.e., actions are viewed, locally, as relative changes in the configuration q and clipped to A(s) based on a maximum joint differ-ence ∆max . Note that we omit the state-dependent notation for readability. The action sets for n

sequential actions are denoted by An.The violation function C : S → { 0, 1} maps a state s to 0 if the action is safe for state s, and 1

if a collision occurs. Thus, we can define the safe state-dependent set Csafe  

> s

= {a | C(s) = 0 , s =(q + a, s env ), a ∈ A} . Note that, in practice, the violation function C is available through simulation frameworks, e.g., MuJoCo [40]. Specifically, senv and q are used to define a virtual twin of the physical environment, and forward kinematics allow for rapidly evaluating C for configurations 

q′ = q + a that result from local actions a. Lastly, the state space of the policy Sπ can be different from the state space of the safeguard S, e.g., a vision-based policy π that uses images as state and perception that obtains senv for the safeguard. Since the policy can output action sequences, it is defined as π : Sπ → A n.We treat quasi-static obstacles as stochastic elements in the environment, allowing us to define the manipulation problem as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) M = ⟨S , Sπ , A, S0, T, R, γ ⟩ where 3S0 ⊂ S ×S π is the distribution of initial states, T : S ×S π ×A → S ×S π is the stochastic transition function, R : Sπ × A → R is the scalar reward function, and γ is the discount factor. The optimal policy, π∗, maximizes the expected discounted cumulative sum of rewards over an infinite horizon. Given the MDP, the violation function C, and a performant policy π (i.e., near-optimal with high success rate), we aim to ensure probabilistic safety guarantees by correcting the actions proposed by policy π:

πsafe (s, a ) = Fsafe (s, π (sπ )) (1) such that P [C(s) = 1] ≤ δ where s = ( q + a, s env ) (2) where Fsafe : S × A → A defines a safeguarding function, and δ ∈ (0 , 1] is a positive constant specified by the user, typically close to 0.

# 4 X-Safe: Cross-Embodiment Safeguard for Manipulation 

Our safeguard provides a solution to (1) by computing probabilistically safe polytopes locally in the configuration space (see Sec. 4.1) and defining an action correction function, called masking func-tion, based on these polytopes (see Sec. 4.2). Fig. 1 summarizes our safeguard for action sequences. In the following, we discuss each of these components in more detail. 

4.1 Safe Polytope Computation 

In this paper, we assume that safety constraints encompass self-collision and collision with quasi-static environment objects. Specifically, the time-varying unsafe set U(t) = Urobot (t) ∪ U env (t),where Urobot (t) describes the constraints of the manipulator to avoid self-collision, and Uenv (t)

denotes quasi-static constraints in the environment. While U(t) is generally intractable to obtain in closed-form in configuration space, the violation function C, typically implemented with a simula-tion framework, can assess if a state s ∈ U (t) and returns 1 in that case. Thus, based on C, we aim to define an algorithm that provides configuration space sets, locally at the current configuration, that have only a low probability of intersection with U(t). Specifically, we adapt the sampling-based method of Edge Inflation – Zeroth Order (EI-ZO) by Werner et al. [39]. EI-ZO computes maximal probabilistically collision-free polytopes in the robot’s configuration space to build a graph of convex sets, and we adapt it to an efficient algorithm for local safe polytopes, i.e., 

LocalZeroOrderSeparatingPlanes , in Alg. 1. In essence, EI-ZO samples points in the configuration space, counts the number of points in collision 

PointsInCollision , and checks if the number of colliding points is below a threshold defined by 

h2

h3

h1  

> 123
> 4

D

qt

p3

p1

p2

cf 2

cf 1

cf 3

Collision points pi ∈ Scol 

Closest free points from bisection cf i

Hyperplanes hi representing P

Polytope P

Collision regions                      

> Figure 2: Illustration of BisectToFree and OrderAndPlaceNonRedundantHyperplanes .Sampled col-lision points pifor non-redundant hyperplanes in red, where for p1the bisection with a limit of 4 steps is illustrated with gray ticks. The points cf iare the last collision-free points. The hyperplanes hiare placed tangent to a sphere around qtwith radius cf iand go through cf i. The hyperplanes form the polytope P.

4Algorithm 1 LocalZeroOrderSeparatingPlanes 

Require: Domain D ⊆ RDoF , local configuration edge (q1, q 2) with q1, q 2 ∈ D , parameters (ε, δ ),maximum number of iterations Niter .

Ensure: Polytope P ⊆ D , Boolean passed indicating if P satisfies (2) for (ε, δ ). 

> 1:

k ← 1, P ← D  

> 2:

passed ← False  

> 3:

for k = 1 , . . . , N iter do  

> 4:

S ∼ UniformSample (P, M ) ∪ E (q1, q 2) 

> 5:

Scol ← PointsInCollision (S) 

> 6:

δk ← 6δπ2k2 

> 7:

if UnadaptiveTest (δk, ε, τ, S col , M ) passes then  

> 8:

passed ← True  

> 9:

break  

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

S∗ 

> free

← BisectToFree (Scol , q 1, q 2) 

> 12:

P ← OrderAndPlaceNonRedundantHyperplanes (P, S ∗

> free

) 

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

return P, passed 

the statistical test UnadaptiveTest . If the test passes, a probabilistically safe polytope has been found. Otherwise, the collision points refine the polytope by generating additional hyperplanes at boundary points between free space and collision found by bisection (see Fig. 2). Then new samples are drawn from domain D, and the process iterates (more details see [39]). To compute the probabilistic guarantees for the polytope generated by EI-ZO, an admissible volume fraction ε that is allowed to be in collision is defined, as well as a confidence threshold δ. Further, a decision threshold τ is introduced, which is typically set to 0.5 and balances the power and cost of the statistical test. Consequently, the polytope returned by EI-ZO exhibits the probabilistic guarantee stated in Prop. 1. 

Proposition 1 (Safe polytope [38]) . Given M ≥ 2 log(1 /δ )(ετ 2) samples for computing the state-dependent safe polytope Ps, the admissible fraction in collision ε, the confidence δ, and the decision threshold τ , then we have the bound 

P

 vol (Ps \ C safe  

> s

)

vol (Ps) > ε 



≤ δ, (3) 

where Csafe  

> s

is the true safe region at the current state s.

Intuitively, the polytope Ps has a fraction of states in collision of less than ϵ, and we expect that this accuracy is violated at most with probability δ.Our main adaptations to EI-ZO are threefold. First, we add the extra samples E to the set of uniform configuration-space samples (Line 4, Alg. 1). Specifically, the extra samples E surround the local configuration edge q1 and q2.Typically, the q1 and q2 of interest are the current configuration qt and candidate action at (see Appendix B for details). Second, we speed up termination at the expense of slightly more conservative sets by placing hyperplanes at the last collision-free point along the direction defined by q1 and q2. As in EI-ZO, free points in a direction of interest are determined with bisection, but BisectToFree returns the last free instead of the last colliding point. Finally, the statistical test in EI-ZO (Line 7, Alg. 1) provides the probabilistic safety guarantee for the polytope stated in Prop. 1 only if the algorithm terminates within the maximum number of iterations Niter . To detect if Niter is sufficient to pass the statistical test, we return an additional Boolean value passed .

4.2 Action Masking Safeguard 

We aim to define a safeguarding function Fsafe such that only actions are executed that lead to the next configuration qt+1 being within the safe polytope Ps. To this end, we draw from ray masking 5Algorithm 2 X-Safe: Action Masking Safeguard 

Require: Current configuration q, action set A, domain D, candidate actions a1: n.

Ensure: Safe actions asafe 1: n , each in A. 

> 1:

for i = 1 , . . . , n do  

> 2:

P, passed ← LocalZeroOrderSeparatingPlanes (D, (q, a i), ε, δ, N iter ) ▷ Alg. 1  

> 3:

if passed then  

> 4:

asafe  

> i

← RayMask (P, A, q, a i) ▷ Alg. 4  

> 5:

q ← asafe  

> i
> 6:

else  

> 7:

asafe  

> i:n

← ChebyshevFallbackController (P, q, A, n − i + 1) ▷ Alg. 3  

> 8:

break  

> 9:

end if  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

return asafe 1: n

in [23] to correct candidate actions a consistent with the intended direction in configuration space to 

asafe . The intended direction connects the current configuration q and the candidate action a, and is called ”ray” (see Fig. 1 and [23, Fig. 1]). Note that since the current configuration q is used as the origin of the rays, ray masking will only produce a standstill action if the candidate action a is the standstill action. We summarize the adapted ray masking approach in Alg. 4. To efficiently determine if the ray direction requires action masking, we first check if the safe polytope Ps fully encloses the state-dependent action set A(s) (Line 1, Alg. 4) or the polytope encloses the action set in the ray direction (Line 5, Alg. 4). In both cases, the action will remain the same, i.e., a = asafe . If the action set intersects with the polytope in the ray direction, we proportionally move the actions towards the center on the ray (Line 9, Alg. 4). Intuitively, any action at the boundary of the action set will be moved to the boundary of the safe polytope, and the closer the action is to the current configuration 

q, the lower the correction (see Fig. 1 and [23, Fig. 1]). Finally, note that projecting unsafe actions to the boundary of the safe polytope would be an alternative to masking [4, 9]. However, for stochastic policies, projection effectively reallocates action probabilities from outside the safe polytope to the boundary [4, Fig. 2]. Consequently, the manipulation policy would need to navigate away from near-collision configurations, which is more challenging than radially contracting the action distribution as with ray masking. The safeguard based on action masking with safe polytopes is presented in Alg. 2. Moreover, we can extend the probabilistic safety guarantee in Prop. 1 for a single action to an action sequence as stated in Prop. 2. 

Proposition 2. For a masked action sequence asafe 1: n using Alg. 2 where passed is true for all n

actions, it holds that 

P

" P ni=1 vol (Psi \ C safe  

> si

)

Pni=1 vol (Psi ) > ε 

#

≤ nδ. (4) The proof follows directly from the union bound. As expected, for longer action sequences, our confidence nδ in the safety of all polytopes Psi degrades. Since policies are typically executed in a receding-horizon fashion with a short action sequence, this can be counteracted by a smaller δ.For an large number of iterations, we expect passed to be true. Since more iterations potentially prohibitively increase runtime for real-time deployment, Alg. 2 introduces a fallback controller, which moves the configuration to the Chebyshev center of the candidate polytope P (see Appendix C, Alg. 3). Using the Chebyshev center to define a fallback controller often frees the manipulator, since this typically leads to moving the manipulator in the opposite direction of collision areas. 6Figure 3: Overview of experiment tasks and embodiments. Left to right: Panda pick and place of can, Aloha bimanual task to exchange pots, xArm7 with overlayed virtual obstacle from MuJoCo simulation, and xArm7 with human operation in cluttered and quasi-static environment. 

4.3 Implementation Details 

While our safeguard is easily usable with different embodiments and state-based as well as image-based policies, the core requirement is having access to the function PointsInCollision , which gives oracle access to whether a configuration is in collision. In practice, this is widely accessible, e.g., when an object-based scene representation is obtained from the perception, and the robotic manipulator is described by a Unified Robot Description Format (URDF) file. Further, we need to specify the domain D, which is typically an axis-aligned box centered at the current configuration. For our experiments, we found that D = A based on maximum joint differences was most effective from both a safety standpoint and a performance standpoint. Note that a small δ leads to more iterations for convergence, and consequently increased runtime, but produces consistently better polytopes, even if UnadaptiveTest did not pass. Generally, setting a large number of maximum iterations Niter is desired so that Alg. 1 almost never reaches Niter 

iterations and consequently Prop. 2 empirically holds as well. Thus, a meaningful tuning approach is to first decrease δ until the polytope is consistently effective at masking actions, and then decrease 

Niter to improve the runtime. For the parameter ε, we observed the least effects, and the chosen 0.01 

balances sampling costs and avoiding collisions well. 

# 5 Experiments 

We demonstrate X-Safe on three embodiments and five tasks for state-based and image-based poli-cies in simulation and on hardware (see Fig. 3). We provide parameters for X-Safe in Appendix A. 

Simulation Settings. First, we compare X-Safe with RAIL [5], which is a state-of-the-art safe-guard that also provides formal collision guarantees for manipulation with learned policies while not relying on a simple stopping fallback controller. Specifically, RAIL proposes a reachability approach, where an optimization problem is solved using a simplified model of the robotic manipu-lator to correct the actions of learned policies. We use the same task as RAIL, where a Franka Panda manipulator needs to pick up a can among objects in a left bin and drop the can into a right bin, while for each episode, the objects in the scene are randomly initialized (see Fig. 3). As policy, we use the state-based diffusion policy (DP) provided by [5]. Second, we demonstrate the scalability to bimanual settings with a task provided by the BiCoord simulation benchmark [41]. We focus on the exchange pots task as the policies provided have a high success rate, while we observe colli-sions with the table for the vanilla policies. We safeguard an AgileX Aloha robot for the provided checkpoint of π0 [42], which is an image- and text-based policy. 

Hardware Settings. We evaluate two different settings on an UFactory XArm7. First, we safeguard an image-based DP for a pick-and-place task (see training details in Appendix F). In particular, we augmented the original tasks for which demonstrations were gathered with a virtual obstacle that intersects with the path that the DP learned (see Fig. 3). We focused on a virtual obstacle to avoid out-of-distribution effects from adding an obstacle to the physical scene (see Appendix I). Second, we augmented a teleoperation controller with X-Safe (see Appendix G) and demonstrate X-Safe 7Table 1: Evaluation on different embodiments. 

Method Success (%) Collision (%) Horizon Intervention Rate (%) 

Franka Panda – Pick and place a can in cluttered environment – Sim [5] 

DP [5] 76 .0 24 .7 899 .8 N/A RAIL [5] 58 .0 2.4 1259 .08 24 .02 

DP with X-Safe 70 .0 0.02 1041 .18 55 .00 

UFactory xArm7 – Pick and place into bin – Hardware 

DP 100 N/A ∗ 38 .4s N/A DP with X-Safe 80 0 169 .2s 84 .5 

> ∗No obstacle in the scene for the in distribution baseline

with two tasks. For the first task, the environment is cluttered with three blue obstacles and a bin that needs to be avoided. The human operator picks up the object and drops it into the bin, while adversarially moving in the direction of obstacles (see Fig. 3). The second task is quasi-static, where there are no obstacles at first. Once the human operator grasps the object, the obstacle closest to the robotic manipulator appears and has to be avoided for navigating to the bin. 

5.1 Results 

Tab. 1 presents our main results for the simulation experiment comparing to state-of-the-art and DP on the xArm7 hardware. Note that we provide the results for AgileX Aloha in Appendix H, and details on the seeds and rollouts in Appendix E. We report the task completion rate per episode, the collision fraction of all time steps, the average episode length, and the time-step intervention rate. Importantly, we observe that the collision fraction with X-Safe is 0.02% , which is much lower than the 2% expected from the formal safety guarantee. While RAIL [5] reduces the performance of the DP by almost 20% compared to the unsafe benchmark, the performance drop under X-Safe is only 6% . This is also reflected by the shorter average horizon for X-Safe. Accordingly, X-Safe intervenes with the DP more frequently. In addition, RAIL exhibits a higher collision rate than X-Safe. We evaluated five rollouts on the xArm7 hardware with and without X-Safe, and observed that one rollout with X-Safe got stuck at the obstacle without colliding. The horizon increased with X-Safe as the DP decelerates over the virtual obstacle. Fig. 4 illustrates the teleoperated manipulator experiments. 2 The human operator adversarially moved the arm toward the obstacles to demonstrate the possible proximity under X-Safe. For the cluttered environment (i.e., two left panels), the manipulator can grasp between three objects and the Chebyshev fallback controller consistently moves the arm away from collision when the adversarial human is trying to hit the obstacle. Additionally, we present a quasi-static environment (i.e., two right panels). Once detected in the physical scene, an obstacle is added to the virtual environment simulated in parallel. Consequently, on the path to the bin, the adversarial operator can no longer take the shortest path because X-Safe prevents them from hitting the obstacle. 

# 6 Limitations 

The central assumption for X-Safe is the availability of the violation function C. To implement C,we use the simulation framework MuJoCo [40] in our implementation, which allows us to easily represent the different environments and embodiments. However, the integration becomes more involved for quasi-static environments, where a perception has to detect safety-relevant environment changes and translate them into simulation-integratable objects or augment the violation function. Further, for dynamic obstacles, like humans, or more diverse notions of safety, like not spilling liquid over electronic hardware, future work is needed to identify rapidly evaluable violation functions. 

> 2Results video at youtu.be/0za 4AmOvMQ

8t 1 t 2 t 3 t 4t 1 t 2 t 3 t 4Figure 4: Human-operated experiments. Left to right: (Cluttered) Human is pushing toward the left-most blue box at t1 and arm stops at t2; then at t3 closely operating over a cluttered environment and dropping object into bin at t4; (Quasi-static) human navigates to the object on direct path, i.e., through the obstacle that will appear at t3 and is visualized in transparent green; at t3, blue obstacle appears and blocks direct path. Bottom: The magnitude of the difference between target end effector positions before and after masking, in millimeters. 

Drawing samples and evaluating them with the violation function iteratively is the main runtime bot-tleneck for X-Safe. Specifically, the runtime increases in near-collision states since more iterations are required to obtain and certify the safe polytope. Consequently, the runtime can vary significantly during an episode, which we observed on our hardware experiments with 0.2s on average per action and worst-case 0.54 s. Further, runtime also increases for longer action sequences as multiple actions are corrected sequentially. While parallelizing safeguarding is possible, if a correction happens, the following actions need to be re-corrected as well. As learning-based policies often provide action sequences, future work should explore potentials for runtime optimization. Our experiments investigate the effect of X-Safe post-training for a limited number of tasks. While for most tasks we observe small performance reduction, for the bimanual task, the brittle VLA policy did not complete the task when used with X-Safe. To more comprehensively understand the applicability of X-Safe, future work should study more tasks and add X-Safe already during training or for fine-tuning. Since the safeguarding function Fsafe can be considered as part of the environment, [43, 9] or as part of the policy [23], integrating X-Safe into reinforcement learning is a promising direction. 

# 7 Conclusion 

We propose X-Safe, a safeguarding approach that provides probabilistic guarantees for collision avoidance of robotic manipulators in quasi-static environments and that is transferable across em-bodiments with low engineering effort and without additional data. In essence, X-Safe combines probabilistically safe polytopes obtained with a violation function and action masking to correct ac-tions. We demonstrate the cross-embodiment transferability and hardware executability on single-arm and two-arm manipulation tasks for image-based and state-based policies. Our empirical results show that X-Safe exhibits lower performance degradation compared to state-of-the-art safeguarding, and does not exceed the formal collision probability. 9Acknowledgments 

We thank Maulik Bhatt for supporting the image-based DP experiments. This work was funded in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant CNS-2111688, CNS-2529645, ECCS-2438314 CAREER Award, and DGE-2146752. Alex Beaudin is partially supported by a Fonds de Recherche du Qu´ ebec Doctoral Scholarship. 

# References 

[1] B. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Ji, Y. Lei, J. Dai, Y. Chen, and Y. Yang. SafeVLA: Towards safety alignment of vision-language-action model via constrained learning. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2026. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=dt940loCBT .[2] D. S. Brown, J. Schneider, A. Dragan, and S. Niekum. Value alignment verification. In Pro-ceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1105–1115, 2021. [3] L. Brunke, M. Greeff, A. W. Hall, Z. Yuan, S. Zhou, J. Panerati, and A. P. Schoellig. Safe learn-ing in robotics: From learning-based control to safe reinforcement learning. Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems , 5:411–444, 2022. [4] H. Krasowski, J. Thumm, M. M¨ uller, L. Sch¨ afer, X. Wang, and M. Althoff. Provably safe rein-forcement learning: Conceptual analysis, survey, and benchmarking. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2023. [5] W. Jung, D. Anthony, U. A. Mishra, N. R. Arachchige, M. Bronars, D. Xu, and S. Kousik. RAIL: Reachability-aided imitation learning for safe policy execution. In IEEE Inter-national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 3582–3589, 2025. doi: 10.1109/ICRA55743.2025.11128656. [6] J. Thumm and M. Althoff. Provably safe deep reinforcement learning for robotic manipula-tion in human environments. In 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 6344–6350. IEEE, 2022. [7] M. Yu, C. Yu, M.-M. Naddaf-Sh, D. Upadhyay, S. Gao, and C. Fan. Efficient motion planning for manipulators with control barrier function-induced neural controller. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 14348–14355, 2024. doi:10.1109/ ICRA57147.2024.10610785. [8] M. Tayal, M. Tayal, A. Singh, S. Kolathaya, and R. Prakash. V-OCBF: Learning safety filters from offline data via value-guided offline control barrier functions. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2026. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= PGO9mpIyyb .[9] H. Markgraf, S. Sawant, H. Krasowski, L. Sch¨ afer, S. Gros, and M. Althoff. Safe reinforcement learning using action projection: Safeguard the policy or the environment? Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2026. [10] F. P. Bejarano, L. Brunke, and A. P. Schoellig. Safety filtering while training: Improving the performance and sample efficiency of reinforcement learning agents. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 10(1):788–795, 2025. [11] Y. S. Shao, C. Chen, S. Kousik, and R. Vasudevan. Reachability-Based Trajectory Safe-guard (RTS): A safe and fast reinforcement learning safety layer for continuous control. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 6(2):3663–3670, 2021. doi:10.1109/LRA.2021.3063989. [12] X. Li, Z. Serlin, G. Yang, and C. Belta. A formal methods approach to interpretable reinforce-ment learning for robotic planning. Science Robotics , 4(37), 2019. 10 [13] D. Morton and M. Pavone. Safe, task-consistent manipulation with operational space control barrier functions. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 187–194, 2025. doi:10.1109/IROS60139.2025.11246389. [14] K. P. Wabersich, A. J. Taylor, J. J. Choi, K. Sreenath, C. J. Tomlin, A. D. Ames, and M. N. Zeilinger. Data-driven safety filters: Hamilton-jacobi reachability, control barrier functions, and predictive methods for uncertain systems. IEEE Control Systems Magazine , 43(5):137– 177, 2023. [15] V. Sharma, N. Mehr, and N. Hovakimyan. Learning differentiable and safe multi-robot control for generalization to novel environments using control barrier functions. In 2024 IEEE 63rd Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , pages 8423–8428. IEEE, 2024. [16] J.-B. Bouvier, K. Nagpal, and N. Mehr. POLICEd RL: Learning Closed-Loop Robot Control Policies with Provable Satisfaction of Hard Constraints. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems , Delft, Netherlands, July 2024. doi:10.15607/RSS.2024.XX.104. [17] J.-B. Bouvier, K. Nagpal, and N. Mehr. Learning to provably satisfy high relative degree constraints for black-box systems. In 2024 IEEE 63rd Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , pages 8320–8325. IEEE, 2024. [18] A. Shrivastava, K. Nagpal, S. Jinkala, J.-B. Bouvier, and N. Mehr. Learning control policies to provably satisfy hard affine constraints for black-box hybrid dynamical systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.22244 , 2026. [19] N. Kochdumper, H. Krasowski, X. Wang, S. Bak, and M. Althoff. Provably safe reinforcement learning via action projection using reachability analysis and polynomial zonotopes. IEEE Open Journal of Control Systems , 2:79–92, 2023. [20] M. Selim, A. Alanwar, M. W. El-Kharashi, H. M. Abbas, and K. H. Johansson. Safe reinforce-ment learning using data-driven predictive control. In Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Communica-tions, Signal Processing, and their Applications (ICCSPA) , pages 1–6, 2022. [21] J.-B. Bouvier, K. Ryu, K. Nagpal, Q. Liao, K. Sreenath, and N. Mehr. Ddat: Diffusion policies enforcing dynamically admissible robot trajectories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.15043 , 2025. [22] S. Gros, M. Zanon, and A. Bemporad. Safe reinforcement learning via projection on a safe set: How to achieve optimality? IFAC-PapersOnLine , 53(2):8076–8081, 2020. [23] R. Stolz, H. Krasowski, J. Thumm, M. Eichelbeck, P. Gassert, and M. Althoff. Excluding the irrelevant: Focusing reinforcement learning through continuous action masking. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 95067–95094, 2024. [24] A. Robey, Z. Ravichandran, E. K. Jones, J. Perlo, F. Barez, V. Kumar, J. Z. Kolter, H. Hassani, and G. J. Pappas. Beyond alignment: Why robotic foundation models need context-aware safety. Science Robotics , 11(113), 2026. doi:10.1126/scirobotics.aef2191. [25] A. Johansson, D. Lindmark, V. Wiberg, and M. Servin. Safety filtering of robotic manipulation under environment uncertainty: a computational approach. arXiv preprint 2509.12674 , 2025. [26] J. Thumm, J. Balletshofer, L. Maglanoc, L. Muschal, and M. Althoff. A general safety frame-work for autonomous manipulation in human environments. arXiv preprint 2412.10180 , 2025. [27] A. Dastider, H. Fang, and M. Lin. APEX: Ambidextrous dual-arm robotic manipulation using collision-free generative diffusion models. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intel-ligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 9526–9533, 2024. doi:10.1109/IROS58592.2024. 10802655. 11 [28] K. Long, K. M. B. Lee, N. Raicevic, N. Attasseri, M. Leok, and N. Atanasov. Neu-ral configuration-space barriers for manipulation planning and control. arXiv preprint 2503.04929 , 2025. [29] T. Kim. Is your safe controller actually safe? a critical review of cbf tautologies and hidden assumptions, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.06954 .[30] C. Smith, Y. Karayiannidis, L. Nalpantidis, X. Gratal, P. Qi, D. V. Dimarogonas, and D. Kragic. Dual arm manipulation — A survey. Robotics and Autonomous systems , 60(10):1340–1353, 2012. [31] A. Orthey, C. Chamzas, and L. E. Kavraki. Sampling-based motion planning: A comparative review. Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems , 7, 2023. [32] M. Elbanhawi and M. Simic. Sampling-based robot motion planning: A review. IEEE Access ,2:56–77, 2014. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2014.2302442. [33] J. Schulman, Y. Duan, J. Ho, A. Lee, I. Awwal, H. Bradlow, J. Pan, S. Patil, K. Goldberg, and P. Abbeel. Motion planning with sequential convex optimization and convex collision checking. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 33(9):1251–1270, 2014. [34] M. Zucker, N. Ratliff, A. D. Dragan, M. Pivtoraiko, M. Klingensmith, C. M. Dellin, J. A. Bagnell, and S. S. Srinivasa. Chomp: Covariant hamiltonian optimization for motion planning. 

The International journal of robotics research , 32(9-10):1164–1193, 2013. [35] C. Mastalli, M. Focchi, I. Havoutis, A. Radulescu, S. Calinon, J. Buchli, D. G. Caldwell, and C. Semini. Trajectory and foothold optimization using low-dimensional models for rough terrain locomotion. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,pages 1096–1103, 2017. [36] R. Deits and R. Tedrake. Computing large convex regions of obstacle-free space through semidefinite programming. In Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics XI: Selected Contributions of the Eleventh International Workshop on the Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics , pages 109–124, 2015. [37] T. Marcucci, M. Petersen, D. Von Wrangel, and R. Tedrake. Motion planning around obstacles with convex optimization. Science robotics , 8(84), 2023. [38] P. Werner, T. Cohn, R. H. Jiang, T. Seyde, M. Simchowitz, R. Tedrake, and D. Rus. Faster algorithms for growing collision-free convex polytopes in robot configuration space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12649 , 2024. [39] P. Werner, R. Cheng, T. Stewart, R. Tedrake, and D. Rus. Superfast configuration-space convex set computation on GPUs for online motion planning. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems , 2025. doi:10.15607/RSS.2025.XXI.045. [40] E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y. Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control. In 

2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , pages 5026– 5033, 2012. doi:10.1109/IROS.2012.6386109. [41] X. Peng, C. Gao, L. Jin, A. Li, and S. Liu. BiCoord: A bimanual manipulation benchmark towards long-horizon spatial-temporal coordination, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2604.05831 .[42] K. Black, N. Brown, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai, L. Groom, K. Haus-man, B. Ichter, S. Jakubczak, T. Jones, L. Ke, S. Levine, A. Li-Bell, M. Mothukuri, S. Nair, K. Pertsch, L. X. Shi, J. Tanner, Q. Vuong, A. Walling, H. Wang, and U. Zhilinsky. π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control, 2026. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2410.24164 .12 [43] N. Hunt, N. Fulton, S. Magliacane, T. N. Hoang, S. Das, and A. Solar-Lezama. Verifiably safe exploration for end-to-end reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control , pages 1–11, 2021. [44] D. Dong, M. Bhatt, S. Choi, and N. Mehr. Mimic-d: Multi-modal imitation for multi-agent coordination with decentralized diffusion policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.14159 , 2025. [45] X. Sun, S. Yang, Y. Chen, F. Fan, Y. Liang, and D. Rakita. Dynamic rank adjustment in diffusion policies for efficient and flexible training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.03822 , 2025. 13 A Safeguard parameters 

We specify the safeguard parameters in Tab. 2. We set D = A and define the width of the box based on the maximum joint differences per single step ∆max . While seemingly innocuous, this domain choice has important effects on the ray masked actions. If we set D larger than the maximum joint differences, then we will observe collisions farther in advance. Consequently, the masking will reduce action magnitudes even if the set defined by maximum joint differences is fully enclosed in 

Ps, given there is a reduction of D in the direction of the ray. While this can be a desired feature as the manipulator essentially slows down, this can also yield more conservative policies that may hinder performance.  

> Table 2: Simulation Evaluation

Description Name Value 

Num. Particles M 1024 Max Iterations Niter 12 Confidence δ 0.005 Fraction in Collision ε 0.02 Power parameter τ 0.5 Mixing Steps Nmix 6

# B Set of extra samples E

To ensure a higher coverage at the points of interest in the configuration space, we add 4DoF 

additional samples in axis-aligned directions of the configuration space (see Fig. 5). Typically, the points of interest are the current configuration q and the target configuration q + a.

c1

c2 q1 q2

> ∆max

E = {• | ∀ cDoF }      

> Figure 5: Set of extra samples Ein configuration space surrounding the points of interest q1and q2.

# C Chebyshev Fallback Controller 

We detail the implementation of the fallback controller in Alg. 3, where 

compute Chebyshev center (P) is the quadratic program 

(c, r max ) = arg max 

> x∈Rn,r ∈R

r

s.t. aT 

> i

x + ∥ai∥2r ≤ bi for all ir ≥ 0,

(5) where ai, b i are the i-th row and component of A and b, respectively. 14 Algorithm 3 ChebyshevFallbackController 

Require: Partial Polytope P = ⟨A, b ⟩P , current configuration qt, number of actions k, maximum action size max action .

Ensure: Uniform failsafe actions abackup ∈ P . 

> 1:

(c, r ) ← compute Chebyshev center (P) 

> 2:

abackup ← clip [( c − qt)/k, −max action , max action ] 

> 3:

return abackup 

# D Efficient Ray Masking for Manipulation Algorithm 

Algorithm 4 RayMask 

Require: Safe polytope Ps = ⟨A, b ⟩P , state-dependent action set A with vertices vA, current con-figuration q, candidate action a ∈ A .

Ensure: Safe action asafe ∈ P s 

> 1:

if A v A − b ≥ 0 then  

> 2:

asafe = a ▷ Safe polytope Ps encloses action set A fully  

> 3:

else  

> 4:

qA 

> a

= compute A boundary (a, A) ▷ Identifying for closest boundary of A to ray  

> 5:

if A q A 

> a

− b ≥ 0 then  

> 6:

asafe = a ▷ Action set A encloses Ps in direction of candidate action  

> 7:

else  

> 8:

qP 

> a

= compute P boundary (a, Ps) ▷ Identifying for closest halfspace of Ps to ray  

> 9:

asafe = q + ∥qP   

> a−q∥∥qA
> a−qt∥

(a − q) ▷ Ray masking adapted from [23, Eq. (6)]  

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

end if  

> 12:

return asafe 

# E Details on evaluation settings in Tab. 1 

All simulation experiments are run on a AMD Ryzen 9 9950X3D 16-Core Processor and a Nvidia RTX 5090 32GB GPU. We evaluated 50 episodes with maximum horizon of 2000 time steps and 

∆max = 0 .015 for the pick-and-place task on the Panda. For the Aloha manipulator, we ran 16 episodes with a maximum horizon 900 steps, and ∆max = 0 .05 .

# F Vision-based policy for pick-and-place on xArm7 

To train an imitation learning policy, we collected 100 rollout demonstrations via teleoperation. The architecture of the policy is a conditional diffusion transformer model (DiT) Dong et al. [44]. We use a standard score-matching reconstruction loss to train a visuomotor DiT that conditions on images and produces desired joint angles (in configuration space) and the gripper state. X-Safe safeguards the desired joint angles, and the executed actions are based on a low-level PID-like controller maintained by UFactory. We set the maximum actions by choosing ∆max = 0 .03 . This is smaller than the maximum diffusion policy output, which slows down the robotic manipulator to allow for overall smoother behavior, given the computational overhead of X-Safe. For safety, and to make the algorithm more stable, we prevent the policy from going directly on the polytope boundary by using the Chebyshev fallback controller (Alg. 3) to move more central into the polytope if the infinity norm of the action to the polytope boundary is less than 5 × 10 −3, which we found aided in stability. 15 Table 3: Evaluation with VLA on bimanual arm. 

Method Success (%) Collision (%) Horizon Intervention Rate (%) 

AgileX Aloha – Exchange pots – Sim [41] 

π0 [42] 43 .8 1.2 703 .9 N/A 

π0 with X-Safe 0 0 900 20 .10 

# G Teleoperation for pick-and-place on xArm7 

We use a 3DConnexion Spacemouse to guide the robot. The Spacemouse commands are given as absolute end-effector poses. To extract joint configurations from these poses, we use the inverse kinematics solver from [45]. The target orientation is fixed to be pointing down to simplify tele-operation. These actions, which are the difference between the target configuration and current configuration, are then ray masked to yield asafe The resulting target configuration, qt + asafe  

> t

is passed to the controller as a desired joint position. We set the maximum action to ∆max = 0 .015 .Similar to the hardware evaluation with the diffusion policy, we set the margin for the infinity norm to 10 −4.

# H Simulation Evaluation on AgileX Aloha with VLA 

We used the single-task, exchange pots π0 checkpoint from BiCoord [41] and standard settings of BiCoord. For the hardware experiments with xArm7, we performed five rollouts from the same DP checkpoint per baseline and X-Safe setting. On the bimanual task with Aloha, the un-safeguarded 

π0 baseline [42] achieves 44% success rate with a 1% collision rate. While X-Safe successfully eliminates all collisions, the safeguarding intervention drops success rate to 0% . We attribute this degradation to compounding errors for the π0 VLA model that result in pushing the policy out of distribution (see Appendix I). 

# I Embodiment-specific Failure Discussion 

Franka Panda For the pick and place task, we observed that collisions mainly happen when the cereal package is not standing upright but has fallen over initially. As a consequence, the diffusion policy immediately gets out of distribution and makes extreme random movement that are more likely leading to collisions. Also, note that in contrast to our results in Tab. 1, the original RAIL paper does not report collisions on the same task [5]. We used the provided code so it is unclear if the collisions are a bug or an actual failure of RAIL. Further, we want to note that we observed that simply replacing actions with stopping actions instead of the Chebyshev fallback controller leads to deadlocks in this setting. 

AgileX Aloha We found that π0 was more susceptible than the diffusion policies to distributional shift, and so safety guarding leads to lower task success rate. Specifically, we observed that the main failure mode was that the policy was grasping the pot, and then got stuck. Note that the safe-guard intervention rate is comparably low (i.e. 20% , see Tab 1), which indicates that the safeguard interventions are not solely responsible for the policy not succeeding. 

UFactory xArm7 Next, to the virtual obstacle, we also tested the vanilla policy with a physical obstacle of the same spatial dimensions, again with five rollouts. We expected some performance degradation since the obstacle was not present in any of the training demonstrations. However, all five rollouts failed. For three, the policy hit the obstacle and did not open the gripper despite hovering over the bin. For the other two, the policy failed to even pick up the object. Additionally, our current implementation of X-Safe is not fully optimized for the hardware, and the policy execution is slowed down by the set ∆max , which further pushes it out of distribution even without an obstacle. Thus, 16 Figure 6: Failure modes of xArm without X-Safe for out-of-distribution hardware evaluation with added brown obstacle. Left to right: robotic manipulator hits obstacle; robotic manipulator is stuck hovering over the bin; robotic manipulator reaches object but does not grasp it. 

to have a more comparable hardware evaluation setup, we decided to use a virtual obstacle for our evaluations of X-Safe to avoid out-of-distribution errors from the policy. 17